Docs for auto analyze observability (#32346)
yugabyte/yugabyte-db: docs/content/stable/additional-features/auto-analyze.md

(1 row)
```

## Observability

> To inspect what the Auto Analyze service is tracking for each table, use the `yb_stat_auto_analyze()` function. This is intended for debugging and observability, with one row per table that the service is currently tracking.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To inspect what the Auto Analyze service is tracking for each table, use the `yb_stat_auto_analyze()` function. This is intended for debugging and observability, with one row per table that the service is currently tracking. (The function is available in v2025.2.3.0 and later.)
```

| `schemaname` | text | Name of the schema that contains the table. |
| `relname` | text | Name of the table. |
| `mutations` | bigint | Number of mutations (INSERT, UPDATE, and DELETE) accumulated for the table since its last successful ANALYZE. The service triggers ANALYZE when this count crosses the configured threshold (and the table's cooldown period has elapsed). |
| `last_analyze_info` | jsonb | Recent auto analyze activity for the table, or NULL if the service has not yet run ANALYZE on the table. |

The `last_analyze_info` column contains an `analyze_history` array holding the most recent auto analyze events for the table (oldest first). Each event has the following fields:

- `timestamp` - Time at which ANALYZE ran, in microseconds since the Unix epoch.
- `cooldown` - Cooldown period (in microseconds) enforced after that run before the next ANALYZE is allowed. As described in [Configure Auto Analyze](#configure-auto-analyze), this value starts at `ysql_auto_analyze_min_cooldown_per_table` and increases on each run (by `ysql_auto_analyze_cooldown_per_table_scale_factor`) up to `ysql_auto_analyze_max_cooldown_per_table`.

### Example

> Continuing from the [Example](#example) above (table `test` in the `public` schema), repeatedly inserting rows causes the service to run ANALYZE more than once. Each ANALYZE adds an entry to `analyze_history`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Continuing the previous [Example](#example) (table `test` in the `public` schema), repeatedly inserting rows causes the service to run ANALYZE more than once. Each ANALYZE adds an entry to `analyze_history`:
```
